# Chapter 4 Discussions

1. Describe the differences between nitrogenous bases, nucleosides, and nucleotides.  Draw an example of each.

Nitrogenous bases include Adenine, Guanine, Thymine, Cyotsine, and Uracil. These molecules consist of an organic
molecule containing a nitrogen atom, and form the basis for nucleosides. Nucleosides are nitrogenous bases linked
to a sugar, such as deoxyribose or ribose. Nucleotides consist of a nucleoside plus a peptide bond.

2. Compare functional and structural differences between DNA and RNA.

DNA
  - ATCG
  - contains deoxyribose
  - copied during transcription
  - double helix structure
RNA
  - AUCG
  - contains ribose
  - copied during translation
  - single polypeptide chain

3. What data was available to Watson and Crick when they determined the structure of DNA?  What were the major features of their model?

Watson and Crick had access to several important pieces of data:
  - Evidence that DNA was the genetic material (Avery, MacLeod, McCarty; Hershey & Chase)
  - Chemical analyses indicating proportial ratios of nitrogenous bases (Chargaff, 1940s)
  - X-ray diffraction images (Franklin & Wilkins)

4. A segment of DNA containing 20 base pairs includes 7 guanine residues. How many adenine residues are in the segment? How many uracil residues are in the segment?

A DNA segment of length 20 with 7 guanine residues must have:
  - 7 matching cytosine residues
  - (20 - 7) = 13 adenine residues
  - 13 matching thymine residues
  - 0 uracil residues (uracil not present in DNA)

5. Describe the outcome of a Sanger sequencing procedure in which
  (a) too little of ddNTP’s is added
    - DNA polymerase will build chains that are too long, because ddNTP acts as a terminator
  (b) too much ddNTP’s added
    - chain termination would occur too frequently, giving many small chains and not enough longer chains
  (c) too few primers added
    - not enough DNA copies will be produced
  (d) too many primers added
    - no effect, unless the amount is so great that other reactions cannot take place
  (e) a polymerase that is very sensitive to ddNTP’s is used (E.coli Pol I is more likely to terminate)
    - chain termination would occur too frequently
  (f) a polymerase that is not very sensitive to ddNTP’s is used (T7 Pol is less likely to terminate).
    - chain termination will not happen frequently enough

6. How does the restriction- modification system of bacterial defense operate?

Restriction-modification in bacteria operates by degrading foreign DNA to prevent infection,
such as from bacteriophages. An enzyme is used to cleave DNA at specific sequences, and then
the foreign DNA is further degraded. To protect itself, a bacterium with RM will
modify its own DNA by adding methyl groups.

7. Why would you want to sequence a whole human genome? Would you expect two identical twins to have identical DNA? How about the clones?

There are many reasons to sequence a whole human genome:
  - genetics research
  - forensics
  - personalized medicine
  - ancestry determination
  - anthropology

Identical twins should share the same, identical DNA, unless a mutation occurred very early during development.
Likewise, cloning should produce the identical DNA if performed correctly.

8. Compare the speed of development (measured in the # of generations) and the effects on the surrounding environment by each of the following: natural selection, artificial selection, and cloning (genetic engineering).

- Natural selection shapes genetics slowly over time as a result of environmental pressures on reproductive success.
- Artificial selection can happen more rapidly due to
  - increased reproduction rates
  - intentional selection of desired traits
- Cloning can happen extremely quickly and is limited only by the speed of the technology used (which is always getting faster)

9. Describe the possible outcome of a PCR reaction in which
  (a) one of the primers is omitted
    - only DNA strands produced by the remaining primer would be obtained
  (b) one of the primers is complimentary to several sites in the template DNA
    - DNA strands of variable length would be produced, based on the distance between binding sites
  (c) there is a single- stranded break in the template dsDNA
    - the first PCR cycle would only yield the complementary strand to the unbroken DNA strand, but subsequent cycles would proceed normally
  (d) there is a double- stranded break in the single template dsDNA
    - the PCR reaction would fail to complete, as there's in-tact template to copy
  (e) the reaction is run for 200 cycles while keeping all reagents at the same concentration as for 20 cycles
    - the products would begin to dominate, slowing the rate of the reaction

10. What is the difference between manipulating a gene for gene therapy and for producing a transgenic organism?

Gene therapy uses genetic modification to correct a medical issue, while transgenic organisms are
modified to incorporate foreign genes for some other purpose.

Chapter 5.  Amino Acids

11. The retroviruses, such as AIDS, have an enzyme reverse transcriptase that makes DNA out of RNA. Does this fact fit the biochemical dogma?

If the biochemical dogma is that proteins are produced from RNA which is produced from DNA, then, no, this fact about retroviruses does not fit.

12. Would a peptide bond form if you mixed two amino acids in an aqueous solution? What about the opposite direction – will you see amino acids if you have peptides in the solution?

It would be unusual to see peptide bonds form from mixing two amino acids in an aqueous solution. The peptide
bond formation requires a high energy input, which usually is reduced using enzymes in vivo. In the opposite
direction, peptides can be broken down via hydrolysis, though the process is slow without the aid of an enzyme.

13. Why do pKa’s for amino group and carboxy group differ in free AA’s and from those in AA’s in peptides?

The pKa's for amino and carboxy groups differ between free AA's and those in peptides because peptides are formed
via bonds between the amino and carboxy groups. This dehydration reaction eliminates a molecule of water and forms
a covalent bond between the two groups.

14. What is an isopeptide bond? Search for an example that has one.

An isopeptide bond is an amide bond similar to a peptide bond, except that one of the amino or carboxyl groups
must be part of the amino acid's side chain. This bond can form spontaneously in bacteriophage capside formation.

15. What percentage of the histidine imidazole group is protonated at a physiological pH of 7.4?

  - Given the imidazole group has a pKa of 6.00:
    - pH = pKa + log(A-/HA)
    - 7.4 = 6.04 + log(A-/HA)
    - 1.36 = log(A-/HA)
    - 10^(1.36) = A-/HA = 22.91
    - % protonated = 100% * [HA]/([HA] + [A-]) = 4.18%

16. What is the net charge of the only polar aromatic AA at pH 1, 7, 10, and 13?

  - Given the histidine pKa of 6.0:
  - For pH=1, pH < pKa, so net charge is +1
  - For pH=7, pH roughly equals pKa, so neutral form will dominate
  - For pH=10 and pH=13, pH > pKa, so net charge is -1

17. Draw and name the only AA that has no optical rotation. Write equations for the ionic dissociations and calculate its approximate pI.

  - Glycine
  - C2H5NO2 <=> C2H4NO2 + H <=> C2H3NO2 + H
  - pI = (pKa1 + pKa2) / 2 = (2.34 + 9.60) / 2 = 5.97

18. Draw and name the only AA that has the pKa of a side chain that is close to neutral pH. Write equations for the ionic dissociations, and calculate its approximate pI.

  - Histidine?
  - C6H9N3O2 <=> C6H8N3O2 + H <=> C6H7N3O2 + H
  - pI = (pka1 + pKa2) / 2 = (6.04 + 9.17) / 2 = 7.61

19. Spell your name using capital letters. If there are letters in your name that do not code for an AA’s, replace them by P, H, and W. Shorten or lengthen the name to make it a heptapeptide. What is its charge at pH 1, 7, and 13? What is its pI?

20. You are asked to purify the protein with a pI of 4.3 that is in the buffer that has pH 7.5. Explain how you would perform the first step in purification including the type of column and elution method.

   - Given the buffer has a pH of 7.5 > pI of 4.3:
   - We can use IEC column with a weak anion exchanger (DEAE)
   - Adjust the pH down and wash away proteins
   - Increase ionic strength to outcompete protein on the matrix

21. A student just obtained a pure protein sample after a semester-long hard work of purification. Explain how s/he could determine the sequence and its identity.

  - Apply SDS-PAGE gel to determine approximate molecular weight
  - Apply mass spectrometry, ESI, of MALDI if necessary
  - Sequence the protein using either tandem MS or Edman sequencing

# Chapter 6: Protein 3D Structure

Discuss the following questions:

I. What limits the conformational freedom of a peptide bond? Draw two resonance structures to support your answer.

-

II. Why do eight AA’s of every helix have only one H bond per AA, while the rest of AA’s in a helix have 2 H bonds per residue?
III. Explain the four levels of protein structure – drawings may also help.

- Primary (1 ̊) structure is the amino acid sequence
- Secondary (2 ̊) structure is local areas of protein chain structure
- Tertiary (3 ̊) structure is the arrangement of secondary structural elements
- Quaternary (4 ̊) structure is the arrangement of polypeptides to form multisubunit complexes

IV. Why are the antiparallel  sheets more stable than the parallel  sheets?

- Antiparallel B sheets allow for much greater Hydrogen bonding between sheets due to amino acid spacing distances.

V. Explain the chemistry of setting ones hair in a “permanent wave”.

- Perming hair can be accomplished by breaking and reforming bonds in the proteins that make up hair.
- For example, by breaking the disulfide bonds, the hair can be easily curled or straightened.
- By reforming the disulfide bonds, the hair becomes rigid again in its new shape.

VI. What do scurvy, brittle bone disease, and the hyperextensibility syndrome have in common?

-

VII. Discuss the similarities and differences in fibrous proteins.

- Keratins are classes of proteins with long peptide sequences that make up many animal tissues. α keratins in particular are common in hair, horns, nails, and feathers, and are distinguished by a 3.6 residue/turn α-helix, which tends to create coiled-coil structures where the inside of the coils form a hydrophobic interface.

- The β sheet structure can be arranged in stacked, antiparallel forms that yield both exibility and strength. The strong Van der Waals interactions of β sheets are what give spider silk its tensile strength, a structure called β silk broin.

- Collagen is another brous protein, a triple helix structure found in skin, tendons, cartilage, bone, and teeth. Like keratin, collagen's multiple-helix structure gives it ample exibility and strength.

VIII. A lot of the proteins after folding to tertiary structure are completely functional. Why do some proteins need to have quaternary structure?

- There are some advantages to quaternary structures:
  - increased efficiency, since they can be built/repaired in pieces
  - increased stability
  - can bring catalytic sites together
  - cooperativity

IX. How do chaotropic agents affect proteins? What other conditions/ agents denature proteins?
X. The G of a denatured protein is only ~40 kJ/mol higher than that of the native-folded protein. Why are the folded proteins only marginally stable?
XI. What do amyloid deposits (Alzheimer’s) and prions (Creutzfeldt- Jakob) have in common?
XII. What does Anfinsen’s experiment show? Does this contradict the logic that “scrambled eggs cannot be unscrambled”?
